First iteration of Logstash plugin docs (#3646)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/integrations/logstash.md

# Using {{ ydb-short-name }} plugins in a Logstash

> This section presents the description of plugins which may be used for connect {{ ydb-short-name }} and Logstash - a free and open server-side data processing pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes the integration options between {{ ydb-short-name }} and Logstash, a server-side data collection and processing pipeline.
```

## Introduction

> [Logstash](https://www.elastic.co/logstash) dynamically ingests, transforms, and ships your data regardless of format or complexity. A Logstash pipeline can contains different types of plugins - input, output и filter. The {{ ydb-short-name }} Logstash plugins repository are hosted on [GitHub](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb-logstash-plugins) and contains the following plugins:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Logstash](https://www.elastic.co/logstash) dynamically ingests, transforms, and ships data regardless of format or complexity. A Logstash pipeline can contain different types of plugins: input, output, and filter. The {{ ydb-short-name }} Logstash plugins repository is hosted on [GitHub](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb-logstash-plugins) and contains the following plugins:
```

> * Storage Plugin for storing Logstash events in [row-oriented](../concepts/datamodel/table.md#row-orineted_table) or [column-oriented](../concepts/datamodel/table.md#olap-data-types) tables {{ ydb-short-name }};
> * Input Topic Plugin for reading Logstash events from {{ ydb-short-name }} [topic](../concepts/topic.md);
> * Output Topic Plugin for sending Logstash events tp {{ ydb-short-name }} [topic](../concepts/topic.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Storage Plugin** for persisting Logstash events in [row-oriented](../concepts/datamodel/table.md#row-orineted_table) or [column-oriented](../concepts/datamodel/table.md#olap-data-types) {{ ydb-short-name }} tables.
* **Input Topic Plugin** for reading Logstash events from {{ ydb-short-name }} [topics](../concepts/topic.md).
* **Output Topic Plugin** for sending Logstash events to {{ ydb-short-name }} [topics](../concepts/topic.md).
```

>  You can [build](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb-logstash-plugins/blob/main/BUILD.md) plugins yourself from sources or download pre-builded [artifacts](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb-logstash-plugins/releases) for two last version of Logstash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These plugins can be [built](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb-logstash-plugins/blob/main/BUILD.md) from the source code or downloaded as pre-built [artifacts](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb-logstash-plugins/releases) for the two latest versions of Logstash.
```

{% note info %}

> Further code snippets use a placeholder `<path-to-logstash>`, which must be replaced by the path to installed Logstash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Further code snippets use the placeholder `<path-to-logstash>`, which must be replaced by a path to a directory with installed Logstash.
```

{% endnote %}

> Any Logstash plugin may be installed by execution of command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Execute the following command to install any Logstash plugin:
```

```bash
<path-to-logstash>/bin/logstash-plugin install </path/to/logstash-plugin.gem>
```

> Check that the plugin is installed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check that the plugin has been installed:
```

```bash
<path-to-logstash>/bin/logstash-plugin list
```

> The command will return a list of all installed plugins and this list must contain the name of installed plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The command will return a list of all installed plugins, which must contain the plugin's name.
```

## Configure {{ ydb-short-name }} connection

> All plugins use the same set of parameters for configure connection to {{ ydb-short-name }}. This set contains only one required parameter `connection_string`, others parameters are optional and allow to configure [an authentication mode](../concepts/auth.md). If config doesn't contain any of them will be used anonymous mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All plugins use the same set of parameters to configure the connection to {{ ydb-short-name }}. This set contains only one required parameter, `connection_string`. Other parameters are optional and allow configuring [an authentication mode](../concepts/auth.md). An anonymous mode will be used if the configuration doesn't contain any of these parameters.
```

```ruby
# This example demonstrates configuration for ydb_storage plugin.
# The plugins ydb_topics_output and ydb_topics_input configure the same way.
ydb_storage {

>     # Database connection string contains schema, hostname, port and database path

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Database connection string contains a schema, hostname, port, and database path
```

    connection_string => "grpc://localhost:2136/local"

>     # Authentication token (for using Access Token mode)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Authentication token (for using "Access Token" mode)
```

    token_auth => "<token_value>"

>     # Authentication token file path (for using Access Token mode)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Authentication token file path (for using the "Access Token" mode)
```

    token_file => "</path/to/token/file>"

>     # Service account key file path (for using Service Account Key mode)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Service account key file path (for using the "Service Account Key" mode)
```

    sa_key_file => "</path/to/key.json>"

>     # Flag to use metadata authentication service (for using Metadata mode)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Flag to use metadata authentication service (for using the "Metadata" mode)
```

    use_metadata => true
}
```

## {{ ydb-short-name }} Storage Plugin

> This plugin allows to store the Logstash events stream in {{ ydb-short-name }} tables for further analysis. This is especially useful with [column tables](../concepts/datamodel/table.md#column-tables) optimized for handling Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) requests. Every [field](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/event-dependent-configuration.html) of Logstash event will be stored in a column with a corresponding name. Those fields that do not match any column will be ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This plugin allows storing the Logstash events stream in {{ ydb-short-name }} tables for further analysis. This is especially useful with [column-oriented tables](../concepts/datamodel/table.md#column-tables) optimized for handling Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) requests. Every [field](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/event-dependent-configuration.html) of a Logstash event will be stored in a column with a corresponding name. Fields that do not match any column will be ignored.
```

### Configuration

> The plugin configuration is making by adding `ydb_storage` block in `output` section of Logstash pipeline [config file](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/configuration.html). The plugin supports standard set of [connection parameters](#configure-ydb-connection) and a few additional options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plugin configuration is done by adding a `ydb_storage` block in the `output` section of the Logstash pipeline [config file](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/configuration.html). The plugin supports the standard set of [connection parameters](#configure-ydb-connection) and a few additional options:
```

> * `table_name` — required name of a destination table
> * `uuid_column` — optional name of column which the plugin will use for storing of auto generated identifier
> * `timestamp_column` — optional name of column which the plugin will use for storing the timestamp of event

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `table_name` — the required name of the destination table.
* `uuid_column` — the optional name of the column that the plugin will use for storing an auto-generated identifier.
* `timestamp_column` — the optional name of the column that the plugin will use for storing the event's timestamp.
```

{% note warning %}

> The Storage plugin doesn't check if the logstash event has correct and unique values for the table primary keys. It uses [bulk upsert method](../dev/batch-upload.md) for storing in {{ ydb-short-name }} and if various events have the same primary keys they will rewrite each other. It is recommended to use those events field that will be present in every event and uniquely identity it. If there is no such set of fields you can add a special column for the primary key and fill it with a random value using parameter `uuid_column`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Storage plugin doesn't check if the Logstash event has correct and unique values for the table's primary key. It uses the [bulk upsert method](../dev/batch-upload.md) for storing data in {{ ydb-short-name }}, and if multiple events have the same primary keys, they will overwrite each other. The primary key is recommended to contain those event fields that will be present in every event and can uniquely identify each event. If no such set of fields exists, add an extra column to the primary key and fill it with a random value using the `uuid_column` parameter.
```

{% endnote %}

> ### Example of usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Usage example
```

#### Creating a table

> Let's create a new column-based table in any existing {{ ydb-short-name }} database with the columns we need. For a primary key we will use a random value generated by the plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new column-oriented table with the necessary columns in any existing {{ ydb-short-name }} database. For example, the table below uses a random value generated by the plugin.
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE `logstash_demo` (
    `uuid`     Text NOT NULL,      -- identifier
    `ts`       Timestamp NOT NULL, -- timestamp of event creation
    `message`  Text,           
    `user`     Text,           
    `level`    Int32,

    PRIMARY KEY (
         `uuid`
    )
)
WITH (STORE = COLUMN);
```

#### Setup plugin in Logstash pipeline config

> For activation of plugin we can add `ydb_storage` block in `output` section of Logstash pipeline [config](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/configuration.html). Additionally let's add `http` block in `input` section for the creation of test messages by http requests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To activate the plugin, add the `ydb_storage` block in the `output` section of the Logstash pipeline [config](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/configuration.html). Additionally, add the `http` block in the `input` section for creating test messages via HTTP requests:
```

```ruby
output {
  ydb_storage {

>     connection_string => "..."    # connection string to  {{ ydb-short-name }}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    connection_string => "..."    # {{ ydb-short-name }} connection string
```

    table_name => "logstash_demo" # the table name

>     uuid_column => "uuid"         # the primary key column with random uuid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    uuid_column => "uuid"         # the primary key column with a random UUID
```

>     timestamp_column => "ts"      # the key for storing the event timestamp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    timestamp_column => "ts"      # the column for storing the event timestamp
```

  }
}

input {
  http {

>     port => 9876 # You can specify any free port

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    port => 9876 # Any free port
```

  }
}
```

> For applying the changes we need to restart `Logstash`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To apply these changes, restart Logstash.
```

> #### Sent test messages
> Then we can sent a few test messages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Send test messages
Send a few test messages:
```

```bash
curl -H "content-type: application/json" -XPUT 'http://127.0.0.1:9876/http/ping' -d '{ "user" : "demo_user", "message" : "demo message", "level": 4}'
curl -H "content-type: application/json" -XPUT 'http://127.0.0.1:9876/http/ping' -d '{ "user" : "test1", "level": 1}'
curl -H "content-type: application/json" -XPUT 'http://127.0.0.1:9876/http/ping' -d '{ "message" : "error", "level": -3}'
```
All commands return `ok` if the messages are sent.

> #### Check that the messages are stored in {{ ydb-short-name }} 
> Now we can check that all sent messages are written in the table. Let's execute query (for work with the column-based table we must use [ScanQuery mode](../reference/ydb-cli/commands/scan-query.md)):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Check that the messages are stored in {{ ydb-short-name }} 

To check that all sent messages are written to the table, execute the following query using [ScanQuery mode](../reference/ydb-cli/commands/scan-query.md)):
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM `logstash_demo`;
```

> and we will get a list of written events:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The query will return a list of written events:
```

```
┌───────┬────────────────┬───────────────────────────────┬─────────────┬────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ level │ message        │ ts                            │  user       │ uuid                                   │
├───────┼────────────────┼───────────────────────────────┼─────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ -3    │ "error"        │ "2024-05-22T13:16:06.491000Z" │  null       │ "74cd4048-0b61-4fb9-9385-308714e21881" │
│  1    │ null           │ "2024-05-22T13:15:56.591000Z" │ "test1"     │ "1df27d0a-9aa0-42c7-9ea2-ab69bc1f5d87" │
│  4    │ "demo message" │ "2024-05-22T13:15:38.760000Z" │ "demo_user" │ "b7468cb1-e1e3-46fa-965d-83e604e80a31" │
└───────┴────────────────┴───────────────────────────────┴─────────────┴────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

> ## {{ ydb-short-name }} Topic Input Plugin
> 
> This plugin allows to read events from the {{ ydb-short-name }} [topic](../concepts/topic.md) and transform them to  the `Logstash` events.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## {{ ydb-short-name }} Topic Input Plugin

This plugin allows reading messages from {{ ydb-short-name }} [topics](../concepts/topic.md) and transforming them into `Logstash` events.

```

### Configuration

> The plugin configuration is making by adding `ydb_topic` block to the `input` section of Logstash pipeline [config](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/configuration.html).The plugin supports standard set of [connection parameters](#configure-ydb-connection) and a few additional options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plugin configuration is done by adding a `ydb_topic` block to the `input` section of the Logstash pipeline [config](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/configuration.html). The plugin supports the standard set of [connection parameters](#configure-ydb-connection) and a few additional options:
```

> * `topic_path` — required the full path of the topic for reading;
> * `consumer_name` — required the name of the topic [consumer](../concepts/topic.md#consumer);
> * `schema` — optional mode of the processing of the {{ ydb-short-name }} events. By default the plugin reads and sent the message as binary data, but if you specify `JSON` mode - every message will be parsed as JSON object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `topic_path` — the required full path of the topic for reading.
* `consumer_name` — the required name of the topic [consumer](../concepts/topic.md#consumer).
* `schema` — optional mode for processing {{ ydb-short-name }} events. By default, the plugin reads and sends messages as binary data, but if you specify the `JSON` mode, each message will be parsed as a JSON object.
```

> ### Example of usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Usage example
```

> #### Creating a topic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Create a topic
```

> Let's create a topic and a consumer in any existing {{ ydb-short-name }} database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a topic and add a consumer to it in any existing {{ ydb-short-name }} database:
```

```bash
ydb -e grpc://localhost:2136 -d /local topic create /local/logstash_demo_topic
ydb -e grpc://localhost:2136 -d /local topic consumer add --consumer logstash-consumer /local/logstash_demo_topic
```

#### Setup plugin in Logstash pipeline config

> For the plugin activation we can add `ydb_topic` block in `input` section of Logstash pipeline [config](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/configuration.html). Additionally let's add `stdout` plugin in `output` section for logging all `Logstash` events:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To activate the plugin, add the `ydb_topic` block in the `input` section of the Logstash pipeline [config](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/configuration.html). Additionally, add the `stdout` plugin in the `output` section for logging all `Logstash` events:
```

```ruby
input {
  ydb_topic {

>     connection_string => "grpc://localhost:2136/local" # Connection string to {{ ydb-short-name }}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    connection_string => "grpc://localhost:2136/local" # {{ ydb-short-name }} connection string
```

    topic_path => "/local/logstash_demo_topic"         # The full path of the topic to read

>     consumer_name => "logstash-consumer"               # The name of the consumer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    consumer_name => "logstash-consumer"               # The consumer name
```

    schema => "JSON"                                   # Use JSON mode
  }
}

output {
  stdout {

>     codec => rubydebug

Reviewer: It needs a comment, preferably with a link to the list of available codecs.

  }
}
```

> For applying the changes we need to restart `Logstash`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To apply these changes, restart Logstash.
```

#### Write a test message to the topic

> Then we can send a few test messages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Send a few test messages to the topic:
```

```bash
echo '{"message":"test"}' | ydb -e grpc://localhost:2136 -d /local topic write /local/logstash_demo_topic
echo '{"user":123}' | ydb -e grpc://localhost:2136 -d /local topic write /local/logstash_demo_topic
```

> #### Check if the message was processed by Logstash
> 
> The plugin `stdout` allows to see the messages in `Logstash` logs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Check if Logstash processed the messages

The `stdout` plugin writes the messages to the Logstash logs:
```

```
{
       "message" => "test",
    "@timestamp" => 2024-05-23T10:31:47.712896899Z,
      "@version" => "1"
}
{
          "user" => 123.0,
    "@timestamp" => 2024-05-23T10:34:08.574599108Z,
      "@version" => "1"
}
```

## {{ ydb-short-name }} Topic Output Plugin

> This plugin allows to write `Logstash` event to the {{ ydb-short-name }} [topic](../concepts/topic.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This plugin allows writing `Logstash` events to a {{ ydb-short-name }} [topic](../concepts/topic.md).
```

### Configuration

> The plugin configuration is making by adding `ydb_topic` block to the `output` section of Logstash pipeline [config](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/configuration.html).The plugin supports standard set of [connection parameters](#configure-ydb-connection) and a few additional options:
> 
> * `topic_path` — required the full path of the topic for writing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plugin configuration is done by adding a `ydb_topic` block to the `output` section of the Logstash pipeline [config](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/configuration.html). The plugin supports the standard set of [connection parameters](#configure-ydb-connection) and a few additional options:

* `topic_path` — the required full path of the topic for writing.
```

> ### Example of usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Usage example
```

> #### Creation a topic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Create a topic
```

> Let's create a topic in any existing {{ ydb-short-name }} database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a topic in any existing {{ ydb-short-name }} database:
```

```bash
ydb -e grpc://localhost:2136 -d /local topic create /local/logstash_demo_topic
```

#### Setup plugin in Logstash pipeline config

> For the plugin activation we can add `ydb_topic` block in `output` section of Logstash pipeline [config](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/configuration.html). Additionally let's add `http` block in `input` section for the creation of test messages by http requests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To activate the plugin, add the `ydb_topic` block in the `output` section of the Logstash pipeline [config](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/configuration.html). Additionally, add the `http` block in the `input` section for creating test messages via HTTP requests:
```

```ruby
output {
  ydb_topic {

>     connection_string => "grpc://localhost:2136/local" # Connection string to {{ ydb-short-name }}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    connection_string => "grpc://localhost:2136/local" # {{ ydb-short-name }} connection string
```

    topic_path => "/local/logstash_demo_topic"         # The topic name for writing
  }
}

input {
  http {

>     port => 9876 # You can specify any free port

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    port => 9876 # Any free port
```

  }
}
```

> For applying the changes we need to restart `Logstash`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To apply these changes, restart Logstash.
```

#### Send a test message

> Let's send a test message via `http` plugin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Send a test message via the `http` plugin:
```

```bash
curl -H "content-type: application/json" -XPUT 'http://127.0.0.1:9876/http/ping' -d '{ "user" : "demo_user", "message" : "demo message", "level": 4}'
```

> We get `ok` if the message sending is successful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The command returns `ok` if the message has been sent successfully.
```

#### Reading the message from the topic

> We can check that the plugin wrote the message to the topic successful with reading this message by CLI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check that the plugin wrote the message to the topic successfully by reading this message via CLI:
```

```bash
ydb -e grpc://localhost:2136 -d /local topic consumer add --consumer logstash-consumer /local/logstash_demo_topic
ydb -e grpc://localhost:2136 -d /local topic read /local/logstash_demo_topic --consumer logstash-consumer --commit true
```

> And there will be a content of the message:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The latter command will return the message content:
```
